good intentions  are quite irrelevant  to the question of whether you are  correct or incorrect  right or wrong good slogans  are quite irrelevant to the question of  whether  politically  morally  philosophically or pragmatically  what you're doing is correct or  incorrect  right or wrong it might seem that  atheism  is such a simple cause that nobody can  screw it up  [Laughter]  that it's such a simple message that  it's such a simple principle to preach  to live by it's such a simple basis for  having an organization collecting  donations such a simple  cause  defined as a charity  that nobody could possibly screw it up  i'm here to tell you  for the last 20 years  we've been screwing it up i'm here to  tell you  right now matt delante probably the  single most influential voice in atheist  activism he is  screwing it up he is getting wrong  and there will be long-term  negative consequences as a result of the  errors  in reasoning  that he's now popularizing now  i used to be a buddhist  how can anyone screw up buddhism how can  buddhism go  it's this way of thinking people want to  imagine as long as you've got a lot of  warm-hearted human beings together with  good intentions and good slogans  it can't go too terribly wrong as long  as we're all saying something about  compassion  and trying to make the world a better  place and brotherly love  modern buddhists are very big on this  concept of whether how can it go wrong  you know as long as you're telling  people that they're going to solve their  emotional problems and their neuroses  you know are gonna they're gonna be on a  journey of self-discovery  and self-improvement how can it go wrong  now we could repeat this for practically  any religion in the world  ancient or modern big or small like  whether it's perceived as a cult or as  an ancient continuous tradition  and you know the biggest domino of all  to fall here really is  communism  have you ever heard someone  explain their reasons  for being a communist  and say to you  well  they're opposed to the greed of  capitalism  well they just want to see workers  getting organized and getting fairer pay  getting a better better shot at life  better opportunities  have you ever met blacks black americans  who've become communist and you just say  something very simple and down to earth  like they feel that neither the democrat  nor nor republican party like none of  the mainstream political parties will  ever work for them because they're black  they felt alienated and excluded so  what would be wrong with  this other political party um  [Music]  [Laughter]  the question of whether  communism is good or evil  correct or incorrect  right or  wrong  it's totally utterly unrelated  to sort of the goodness  of these slogans or the goodness of the  intentions of the people who buy into  those slogans right now i can say the  same about buddhism right  the goodness or badness of buddhism or  of any particular form or particular  organization within buddhism as a  religion  right you can never come to a conclusion  on the basis of the goodness of the  intentions people state or the goodness  of their their particular slogans why  are you guys  collecting these donations oh it's to  teach people transcendental meditation  you know what what could be wrong with  that  what could go so horribly terribly wrong  some of you in the audience have no idea  what i'm talking about when i think of  it here and some of you know some of you  don't need me to explain  okay it can go  wrong  when the communists for their part say  that they're collecting donations in the  name of human equality  as opposed to inequality what could be  so bad about that  now the flip side is whether we're  talking about atheism buddhism communism  or some other example  when these movements are right about  something when they're correct  it's often  equally arbitrary and seemingly random  the catholic church  was opposed to  cousin marriage they were opposed to  inbreeding  specifically here we're referring to  cousins marrying other cousins  they were right  there's no reason it's not it's not  because of the the it's not because  catholic prayer works better than  protestant prayer it's not because when  catholics pray they talk to god and when  protestants pray they just get a dial  tone like they're calling god and not  getting it that's not why all right but  randomly arbitrarily the catholics were  really right about that and if you don't  know anything about the consequences of  inbreeding and cousin marriage all right  it's actually an incredibly important  thing that catholics have forbidden and  discouraged people from  sexually reproducing with their own  cousins and protestants  it's a shorter history but it's a much  worse history with much worse outcomes  islam  cousin marriage in islam now this gets  even scarier talking about inbreeding on  a massive scale and huge negative  consequences as a result now am i saying  to you that catholicism is a better  religion than islam or it's a better  religion than than protestantism or that  it's a better religion than atheism  huge numbers of atheists seem to see  nothing wrong with marrying your cousin  for completely secular scientific  reasons i'm telling you there's  something wrong with it but you can be  an atheist and be wrong about this  imagine a parallel universe  in which the communists had the best  advice about how to run a farmer  where communist agriculture was just  this amazingly effective incredible way  to reorganize farm labor a better way to  grow pears and oranges imagine if the  soviet union under communism had been  flourishing and producing so much more  through agriculture that farms were just  so much more productive in the soviet  union than in capitalist western europe  or the united states of america or what  have you now if you know anything  the history of communism both the  history of the modern world the advice  communists had about farming was  disastrous it was so terrible whether  you evaluate it as a religion frankly or  as a science or  historical happenstance what communists  had to say about farming  was a disaster in russia was a disaster  throughout the eastern bloc of  soviet aligned states it was a disaster  in vietnam  it was a disaster in cambodia totally  different climate right it's not like oh  well you know uh the soviet approach to  agriculture didn't work so well in  siberia but it turned out great in  vietnam nope it was it was a disaster  everywhere from saccoland island to  to cambodia you know but when vietnam  was implemented for a significant length  of time you know  um  china you heard of it you ever heard of  china  this is an experiment on an enormous  unfathomable scale with reorganizing  farming agriculture right  now  what the communists had to say about  economics very broadly what they had to  say about factory production what they  had to say about specific types of  factory production i remember learning  about the history of how  teapots and teacups were made  under communism in china in contrast how  they were made before and after you know  before and after the period which people  actually believed in communism china  still is a communist country to some  extent but they don't run farms that way  anymore and they don't make tea pot that  way anymore either  um  the goodness of the intentions people  have  when they embrace when they believe in  these slogans right that tells us  nothing  about what's right or wrong about a  religious movement about a political  movement or even just about say a policy  you know  and um  the trap  i see atheism moving into  and matt dillahunty is not the only one  but i think it's very efficient to  criticize matt dohan because i think he  really does reflect  frankly the accumulated uh experience of  the last 20 years of the atheist  movement he's not new  i mean i think his current opinions  um his current advice his current  guidance as a leader in the uh the  atheist movement it really reflects 20  years of experience  failed paradigms like you've seen  different fads uh rise and fall and you  know  it it reflects his personal  understanding  of what went wrong in the next 20 years  and what he hopes will go right in the  next one here so i take it seriously and  i criticize it seriously because i think  it's i think i think he was wrong before  and i think he's still wrong  now  um  i think it's very easy  for people who are within  the atheist mindset to only see the  goodness of the intentions and the  goodness of the slogans  and not to really ask these questions of  true and false right and wrong  so at the end of  these decades of experience in the  movement  matt dillahunty's conclusion  is that what we are fighting for  is equality  what an appealing slogan  and it's wrong  he argues  that what we are fighting against  is religious  privilege  religious  privilege  not religion  not faith not belief  not pseudoscience  but religious  privilege so that through the abolition  of that privilege  we can all  be equal  to me it's so  2020 what can i tell you i mean being  honest it sounds a little bit more 2015  than 2022 to me but it's very much of  the current era of the current epoch of  trying to you know express and  conceptualize every political struggle  as a struggle against  privilege and in favor of equality so  i've seen this come and go uh with the  vegan movement where like instead of  just saying you're trying to close down  slaughterhouses you're trying to stop  meat production stop this form of  farming instead we're trying to  articulate this really jesuitical line  of reasons like  well you know what we're against is  speciesism because that's the inequality  of humans and animals and what we want  is equality and  what we're trying to get rid of is human  privilege  it's totally incoherent it's totally  wrong there was an attempt to refashion  reimagine what veganism was as a  movement i think it's done a lot more  a lot more harm than good  um  okay so what's what's the problem with  matt dillahunty's approach to to  atheists  the objective all right okay  so i've got to express this in two parts  it's following the pattern of his own  argument what it is we're fighting for  and what it is we're fighting against  um  there is a sense  in which it's mere happenstance that the  religions are wrong about all these  things  um sort of like the happenstance if you  like that the communists were totally  wrong about economics totally wrong  about agriculture it would be much  harder to argue against communism if  they had flourishing farms they were  tremendously successful in reform  agriculture if they were able to  actually show they had a better way to  run a farm that people just couldn't do  in france for example or west germany  that oh the farms of east germany were  so much better than the farms of west  germany or the farms of north korea were  so much better the farms of south korea  that would be a much different argument  to make and say well look even though  you guys have better farming or a better  economy or better factories than we do  still  this thing called democracy and what it  entails in terms of capitalism this is  so important to us this idea of freedom  of speech and multiple parties  contesting who controls the government  and having newspapers that endlessly  snipe and criticize and cross-examine  each other that that's so important that  we're just gonna have to pass we're just  gonna have to survive without this  better system of farming but  as we can just discuss it here as a  matter of happenstance of course it  isn't happenstance but as if it were a  matter of happenstance no  communism was an economic disaster and  communism was a you know  agricultural disaster whatever you want  to say  you know in this same wise  imagine how much harder it would be  to argue against a religion that wasn't  homophobic  how much harder it would be to argue  against a religion that didn't deprive  you  of your sexual liberty that didn't try  to force you to be a virgin until  marriage  for example how are you to argue against  a religion that didn't even particularly  believe in monogamy between a husband  and wife that though all kinds of  different  arrangements are possible  one man with multiple women or one woman  with multiple men or who knows you know  open relationships those relationships a  religion that was cool though that a  religion that really didn't see anything  wrong with transgender people that  really didn't see anything wrong with  you know gay marriage  imagine  if the religion you had to criticize was  taravata buddhism  as practiced in thailand  the unbelievable intellectual laziness  of people like matt dillahunty is  demonstrating the fact that they never  got off their asses to deal with  buddhism they never got off their asses  to deal with  hinduism they never got off their asses  to deal with any religion that wasn't  conveniently so bigoted that you know  what could just be ridiculed from the  pulpit by them right  what if by happenstance there were a  religion  that really made your life better  instead of worse that didn't convince  you that you were born with original sin  didn't convince you had to live in a  state of perpetual guilt and anxiety or  whatever that actually as with the  people of town the brute sensuality of  thai culture that left you completely  free to live a life of  selfish  shallow insipid sensory self-indulgence  i mean is there any country on earth  where the culture is more  you know  unrepentantly fixated on the pleasures  of the senses then  than modern thailand and by the way  there's a really interesting uh contrast  to make between terabyte of buddhism  thailand and tiravata buddhists in sri  lanka because on paper it's the same  religion and yet in practice they're so  different and by the way guys if you  don't know  in terms of the level of acceptance of  homosexuals and transgender people in in  thailand they do participate in  elections they do stand for office there  are transgender people and openly gay  and openly people in in politics  and they do join the army they serve in  the army  and for me one of the most tangible  signs of the real acceptance of of out  homosexuals over homosexuals as opposed  to closeted or covert intersections and  of uh transgender people is just their  level of acceptance in the high schools  and universities okay  and thailand's the only country i've  i've ever been in where you saw  transgender people who really were  friends with and were integrated with  the the heterosexual students it's not  that they had their own little clique  that you can see almost everywhere i  mean almost you know obviously not in  muslim majority countries but like it's  one thing to go to university and you  say oh okay and there were the  transgender students kind of standing in  a corner amongst themselves okay and  there are the gay students they have  their own club but we're no like really  you see gay and transgender people who  are just living amongst and with the  straight people really as equals where  it's really not a big deal it's just  it's just not seen as that important  there's this very deep level of  acceptance of homosexuality and  you know what  and buddhism  as a religion  is still bad and evil and wrong and why  because it's based on faith  it's based on blind faith and there's a  really important point to make here and  really important to internalize that is  no matter how good a religion  might be like if you made a list of its  precepts  and principles right if you had a  religion that didn't practice  circumcision  that neither practiced circumcision on  males nor females right terabyte of  buddhism it's a big difference what's  the difference between thailand and  malaysia same climate guys same beaches  a lot of things are the same life in  thailand versus life same fruit same  vegetables  i the cuisine is pretty similar to  actually thailand  the religion is a big difference in life  and whether or not as a man you had part  of your penis cut off losing 60 of the  nerve endings in your penis so big  differences with big  implications right  no matter how  correct  as opposed to incorrect the list of  principles set down by a religion  might be right  actually they're bad and evil and wrong  because your relationship to them is of  believer  to a graven idol  and with the passage of time  these fixed truths  will turn into  terrible tyrannical things no matter how  good they are  now  i've been reading  a lot of  political history both primary and  secondary sources  from the era of  the american revolution  before that a couple years ago  really really you do need to do this  research first but a couple years ago i  did research about the english civil war  you really need to understand the  english civil war first understand the  american  revolution  if i had been alive at that time  i probably would have cared intensely  and passionately about the difference  between catholicism and protestantism  all right the reality in the western  world at that time  was that  the protestant faith especially as it  had adapted in england due to  bizarre historical circumstances  historical circumstances that have  nothing to do with the the details to be  found in the appendix to the bible or  something i mean it's not like you're  going to go through the footnotes and i  know the bible and figure out how this  came about  circumstances external to  scripture and you know external to the  faith in many ways circumstances  including the english civil war the rise  and fall of the dictatorship of oliver  cromwell  it's a long story  okay this thing happened  whereby british protestants became  really proud of  partial  separation of church and state  not perfect not absolute separation of  sheridan state this very strange  compromise that ensued after the  english civil war that made  puritanism  possible that made quakerism  possible that made quakers  refusing to pay taxes to support the war  possible like back in the dark ages  right  all those people would have been  tortured as heretics like  think about what quakerism is as a  religion to us today like okay it's just  another flavor of christianity oh no no  oh no no back in the 1540s or something  go back just a few centuries all right  this is stuff that people would fight  and die for and people would be in  tortured and interrogated and killed for  right okay and you know what it made the  life of  an atheist  free thinker  possible  there was a little bit more wiggle room  uh frankly let's let's give us an  example someone like uh someone like  benjamin franklin  benjamin franklin was certainly not a  religious man i think he will look in  vain for him openly espousing atheism  but a lot of these guys they kept their  cards close to their chests but to say  they were free thinkers was an  understatement right  a lot of these founding fathers they  vaguely identified as deists  or they had some kind of very creative  for me reinterpretation  of the bible and the history of  christianity and that was a mainstream  phenomenon again especially in the  aftermath of the of the civil war now  my point is this  at that time however arbitrarily  english protestantism was right  about a checklist of things they offered  a set of social and political advantages  to be part of the anglican sphere the  british empire sphere  that you did not have  in france  you did not have in quebec  in north america like right right next  door right that you didn't have in the  french  dominion right she didn't have under  spanish dominion spain's still  dominating large parts of the economy in  north america of course south and  central america so right next door and  you have trade contact with those people  you're in a situation where it seems  like  so much of europe is still in the dark  ages and the british isles and the  british colonies have taken this huge  step forward  toward modernity with just a little bit  of separation  of church and state  and just a little bit of democracy  like england at that time can we say it  was five percent democracy  like it was there was just some that  there was a little bit of democracy just  a little bit  but that was itself so precious it was  so important it was so much more than as  i say the rest of europe or the other  colonies under other european countries  dominions let alone  what you saw in that time of the ottoman  empire in the muslim world generally  speaking with the ottoman empire  specifically the ottoman empire was  important because it was incredibly  powerful in that period incredible  military power but also was just  adjacent  europe didn't have that much contact  with indonesia you know they did  they did have some by the way but you  know the ottoman empire was very much  what europe was it was the mirror  europe was looking into all the time  right next door and they were facing off  against it  and and struggling against okay  so there were a whole lot of people  right around the time of the american  revolution who were willing to fight and  die  for what were vaguely considered you  know the privileges of being an  englishman of being part of this sphere  of yeah these are all really overused  terms you know liberty and freedom and  you know freedom of conscience  and it's so easy for us now to look back  and see all the hypocrisies involved  well you people still own slaves and you  people were engaged in genocide  you know and of course i mean this is  still to this day this is part of matt  delante's current complaint about  privilege  each one of the colonies um you know now  comprising the united states or would  have each one of the british colonies um  they all had  some kind of confessional requirement to  be in government and sometimes it was  like well  you have to be a member of a  non-dissenting english church so i was  like well  you can be a part of any english church  as long as it's not catholic and so i  was like well you can be protestant or  catholic but you can't be a quaker or  something like  each one was trying to one way or  another limit  how much freedom of religion you had if  you were going to be a part of of  government and they came up with various  imperfect compromises some of which are  still on the books which you know they  may be unconstitutional in america but  there's still a shadow cast in the  united states of america from this early  period this history of um  some  religious freedom some  separation of church and state and some  democracy and of course it's very easy  for me to say today it's it's not enough  it's too little  but that difference was worth  fighting for and worth dying for i've  just been indicating to you right the  buddhist religion is bad and evil and  wrong okay  what if malaysia wants to conquer  thailand what if saudi arabia wants to  conquer thailand what if malaysia and  saudi arabia and afghanistan and iran  all combine their forces and want to  conquer thailand and turn it into  another  muslim country right the freedoms the  liberties and the things that buddhism  happened to write about okay they're  still worth they're still worth fighting  for  but you see the problem  [Laughter]  we're still stuck at the level of  talking about the lesser of two evils  and most of the time that's what  political discourse is about that's what  that's about the history of armies and  wars and politics and so on has a great  deal to do with choosing between two  evils to decide which side you're gonna  be on including by the way during world  war ii a whole lot of people had to  choose between fighting for adolf hitler  or fighting for joseph stalin they're  both terrible people adolf hitler is a  terrible person joseph stalin also a  terrible person there were people  there were people who chose to fight  with the russians forced that one just  because it the alternative  available them was was hitler and those  those were the two sides they had to  they had to choose between it's an awful  choice  and indeed there were awful consequences  and as soon as hitler was defeated just  look at what stalin did it's it's  horrifying you know  and yeah there's there's plenty of blame  to go around but my point being here  even the story of world war ii is not a  simple question of contrasting uh good  and evil okay  so look  the particular religions that matt de la  hunty chooses to focus on ignoring all  others right  they happen to be wrong  about a kind of a list of social justice  issues that make them sort of easy to  lampoon  and the very easiness of tackling them  in that way and of doing fundraising and  of building to some extent a movement  here on the internet and so on and so  forth i think it has lulled  people like matt dillahunty into an  unbelievable state of fatuous  self-importance  and the ultimate expression of this is  his current theory his current thesis  that what we are fighting for as  atheists is one  equality and two  the end of  religious privilege  the point being here that the end game  that he wants the conclusion that he  wants to achieve  is simply one in which religious people  and atheists have a kind of fair  playing field an even playing field  where for example  if christian churches and muslim mosques  if they're doing fundraising so they can  open and operate a school  they don't get a special tax break or a  special tax incentive that a scientific  foundation wouldn't get if that  scientific foundation wants to collect  donations  and open a school  that is lunacy  that's utterly wrong  that's not what we want at all and i  think on a very deep level it reflects  the libertarian lie  what is the great libertarian lie which  today influences the left and the right  and the center it influences everyone  everyone is to some extent brainwashed  by libertarianism in the united states  of america it's been an incredibly  successful doctrine in the last say  50 years  despite the fact that nobody votes for  the libertarian party neoconservatism  was influenced by libertarianism  neoliberalism  was enforced by libertarianism  the whole spectrum left right and center  in the last 50 years was really  influenced by libertarians  libertarianism is based on the notion  it's based on the conceit  that as long as each of us  as individuals makes up our own mind as  long as each of us is free to choose  then out of the cacophony of those  choices things will work out for the  best  in the end  right think about this in terms of  ecology  libertarians would argue to you with  absolutely no irony that oh yeah yeah  yeah just let everyone cut down the  forest for their own reasons let it all  be parceled out what have you and out of  that cacophony things will turn the best  let everyone decide for themselves  whether they're going to  participate in a government program for  sewage treatment or if they're just  going to dump their own sewage directly  into the river untreated or what have  you you know oh yeah just let people  make up their own  minds let parents choose their own  schools for their children just give  them vouchers let them choose whatever  school they want and if they're muslim  fundamentalists let them put their kids  into a crazy madrassa where they're  brainwashed and raised in islam and if  the parents are mormons let them put  their kid into a crazy mormon school  where they're brainwashed and raised in  mormonism and so on for each  for each religion if they're crazy  communists they can have a crazy  communist school and as long as  everybody is doing their own thing as  long as everybody is free to choose that  supposedly the government doesn't care  if you're brainwashing your children to  never use toothpaste because you think  fluoride is a brain control controversy  it doesn't matter if your kids are  raised believing in a flat earth or or  what have you that it doesn't matter you  know again if your kids have tooth decay  as a result then we all have to deal  with that  that that  the the fundamental conceit  the fundamental lie  is that a plurality of various forms of  insanity competing with one another  will produce sanity  that that the most rational alternative  the most efficient or most effective  alternative will emerge as the winner if  you just allow the marketplace of ideas  if you allow free market forces if you  just allow people again with this notion  of equality you let people choose  and there is never any interest in real  world  examples  right why don't you look at what's  happened with the freedom to choose  schools just in england  in the last  50 years  in any given neighborhood in england  what are your choices is there an  atheist school  is there a scientific school is it the  best school no there's a catholic school  and there's a protestant school and  depend if you're in downtown london  there may also be a muslim school and  there may be a jewish school there are a  few in england  you have the next one  gee  gee look at all your choices look at all  the different ways you can brainwash  your children look at all the different  religions that want to circumcise you  that want to give you a magical mystery  excuse for cutting off part of your  penis you get your choice which flavor  of insanity would you prefer and that's  england that's england in the year 2022.  have you done research have you looked  at what schools are like in iran when  schools are like in malaysia in thailand  we might as well include real world  situations or schools anywhere schools i  could talk about my own upbringing talk  about toronto we could talk about  montreal  you know  it's completely ridiculous  to say that the objective of atheists is  simply to achieve equality and the  abolition of religious privilege  right  what we want to abolish  is religion  period  now  let's say you have one school where  children are taught every day  to sit on their knees and pray to get  down on their knees and pray  then you have another school  i've seen this  it's real you have a buddhist school  where they're taught to sit in a  different posture  and meditate  at one school  they recite and sing  songs from the gospel from the bible and  another they memorize and recite the  quran  right and then over this other school  buddhist sutras everyone put ancient  scriptural texts from  from buddhism  buddhism is different  and again whether or not you've regarded  as mere happenstance there are a whole  bunch of ways in which i can say the  buddhist school is better if these are  my only choices i'm going to choose to  put my kid in the buddha school for one  thing my kid might be gay i might know  it my kid might not know if you're  homosexual you're going to be better off  in the buddhist school than in the  christian school or the muslim no doubt  if you're a woman  the status of women i mean even in the  worst buddhist countries like even in  cambodia the status of women is so much  better than a muslim country it's so  much better than a christian country  right there's no comparison so women  over 50 of the population  of course if you have a daughter  you should put her into the the buddhist  school of course she goes i'm not  pretending they're all the same and if  if my only choice is to put my kid into  a catholic school versus a muslim school  i would choose the catholic school if my  only choice to put my kid into a  catholic school versus a protestant  school  it's close  probably i'd choose the practical but in  the particular case some catholic  schools are better than some possible  right like i'm not these things are not  all the same right but there's something  really fundamental here right there's  something really important  they have in common  closing your eyes and wishing  closing your eyes and dreaming  while you're still awake  inculcating into children teaching them  rehearsing with them practicing with  them right  believing in things that can never  be true  leading them through this journey  of the imagination right a marketing  of false promises  you know what buddhism  has in common with both christianity and  islam teaching children if they do good  deeds they will be rewarded for them  after they die  you think that's harmless  uh you think that's you think we're  going to have a better society in the  future if we just have  equality and free competition in the  free free marketplace today if we just  get rid of religious privilege  if we just take away say the privilege  that christian schools have over muslim  schools so that muslim schools get the  same amount of funding  you know well  maybe maybe we should even give more  money  to islam  so they can go out and convert first  nations people american indian people  the way christians used to think about  how unfair that is that the indigenous  people of north america  that you know people like the kree and  the ojibwe and the dna  are native people here they never had  the chance to convert to islam do you  think that would be an improvement if we  started giving government funds  so that you know islamic temples and  muslim you know muslim schools madrasas  could start  converting and convincing our indigenous  people to leave christianity and become  muslim instead probably a tiny number of  them have converted in prison you know  islam is very active in converting  people within prison black white and and  otherwise people become muslim in prison  in significant numbers i know  um you know is that that sound good to  you like you know  it's just ridiculous now  my point here is not to say that that uh  religious privilege  doesn't exist  the most palpable form of it no doubt is  this issue of  tax breaks there's a tax advantage given  to a religious foundation as opposed to  a a secular one but this isn't true for  the whole planet earth right and you can  look at countries where this isn't the  case there isn't this tax advantage and  where their problems with the religion  are the same or worse like i just like  okay what is this difference in taxes  worth because you know you can set up a  non-profit a secular nonprofit  organization in the united states of  america in western europe you can get  very significant tax breaks you get  significant tax advantages anyway  you can look into the details but like  if we were to actually say what the  financial disadvantages of being a  secular foundation as opposed to a  religious foundation is it 15  is it 5 like i think if you really do  the math if you really crush the numbers  it's not some enormous landslide  difference  economically if you're doing if you are  doing charitable activities so let's  give an example you have a secular  foundation that wants to feed and clothe  homeless people um  you're helping out almost people in your  you're all atheists  you have a religious foundation  and then you actually get an actuarial  scientist you get an accounting team to  run the numbers and say okay if this is  how much our expenses are this is how  much overhead we have these are payroll  costs  and ask them do you think it will be  advantageous for us if we incorporate as  a religion instead of being a secular  foundation  they can crush the numbers and they can  tell you what difference it'll make i'm  not saying this is zero but if you think  this is going to transform society in  the united states of america in france  france a very interesting example i'm  not speaking from ignorance on that i've  lived in france i have a daughter  growing up in france there are reasons  why i know about how  secularism works in france how how it is  in canada you know what the advantages  are incorporated  whether you think of that as a five  percent financial advantage or a 15  advantage how do you think the world  will change if you achieve this  so-called  equality you're talking what difference  is that going to make in the united  states america  let alone iran let alone malaysia let  alone  thailand any any japan  any society  in the world this is the other thing  that's very peculiar about his argument  he says  that the problem is  religious privilege as opposed to  religion and he does say  incoherently i've heard him say it in  other contexts for example and talking  about christmas and so on his attitude  is that you should just let people  believe whatever they want to believe  and that all we are fighting for we as  atheists  is merely that we also can believe what  everyone believes that we also equally  like we also can be ignorant and live in  darkness  you know it's just it's this is all  based on this kind of false equivalence  all right i'm sorry we're not equal  right if you believe toothpaste is part  of a mind control conspiracy from the  government you think fluoride and  toothpaste  you're wrong if you believe the earth is  flat and i believe the earth is  imperfectly spherical i can't just say  it's a sphere it's not quite there  there's a ball shape of some kind of  okay guess what we're not all equal your  beliefs are wrong and stupid and mine  are correct i can't even say they're  smart they're just correct all right  within a country like iran within a  country like jordan any muslim majority  country you want a name okay  the most intelligent people  the people with the most initiative  you know the people with the most  brilliance the people who in practice  really are  free thinkers people really start  thinking for themselves okay  they  are the atheists  we're not equal it takes a person of  extraordinary  intelligence  character  just self-confidence  to live in a muslim majority society and  stand up to your own parents  and say no i'm not going to be a part of  this anymore to be in a society where 99  of people are circumcised and say look  circumcision is utterly  bad and evil and wrong i wouldn't do it  to myself i wouldn't do it to my own  child and i can't believe you did this  to me this is barbaric what's wrong with  you we're not all equal guys like it's  just ridiculous to pretend that this is  like different flavors of ice cream  and we just there's just no reason for  me to go around trying to force everyone  else to even know ice cream if you like  chocolate chip that's fine you do you if  you like mint you do you if you like uh  grape  whatever hey man  each of us enjoys eating a different  flavor of ice cream we're all equal and  we can just let the free market you know  present us with however many options and  we can all compete no  you know the position atheists are in is  that some people are right and some  people are wrong and this is why i want  to introduce communism right up front  okay  in the 20th century a huge percentage of  the people who could have been building  an atheist movement who could have been  fighting for an atheist world they were  seduced by communism like in terms of  like the energy and attention and  initiative like the work that could have  gone into creating an atheist world  challenging demolishing religion right a  lot of that  was co-opted by was taken was funneled  into  communism a lot of people who were  atheists became communists because they  were atheists a lot of people who were  atheists made excuses for communism and  rationalized what was wrong with  communism because they felt this kinship  like oh here's this political regime  that at least on some level mouths the  principles  okay being an atheist doesn't mean  you're right over there being a you can  be an atheist and you can be horribly  terribly wrong and i don't really see  any interest amongst any of the leaders  of of atheism now in the 21st century  just look back at the 20th century this  is not ancient history and deal with the  fact that atheists have indeed been  responsible for some of the most  mind-blowing massacres and instances of  mass starvation some of the most  horribly repressive governments who've  ever existed in the history of the world  right  if you could be  reincarnated  in  17th century italy  or  live through the famine under mao zedong  in communist china  where would you like to be teleported to  and reincarnated you know if you could  live to like i'm just saying there are  all kinds of moderately repressive  religious regimes that have come and  gone i don't know  sardinia in 1852 much too christian for  my tastes i don't want to live in  christian sardinia in the 1850s how  about you know how about athens under  the under the ottoman empire talking  about modern athens non-ancient ads when  it was ruled by the by the ottoman turks  not too comfortable not too great  intellectual climate you know what's  worse  joseph stalin  living in living in atheist communist  russia like guess what guys it's not  atheists can be wrong too and atheists  have been wrong really on the single  biggest question of the 20th century  like communism was the single biggest  threat to the status quo marxism was the  single biggest threat to the status quo  globally within the united states and  everywhere else  for some reason for some reason it's  getting hot  this is not planned to be a striptease  guys i see your questions coming in if  you guys have a second hit the thumbs up  it'll help people  discover the video so i appreciate if  you have a second thumbs up  and uh if you have something intelligent  to say i can  i can uh i can answer questions so look  uh zippidaya says  forgive me if i'm mispronouncing your  names of that  quote  it's impossible to abolish religion  life is too hard to cling to secular  humanism especially for poor people  close quote  i lived in thailand  i lived in laos i lived in cambodia how  would you feel  if someone there said to you that it's  impossible to abolish pedophilia  you would say [ __ ] and you would say  either you're a coward  you're an idiot or you're a pedophile  yourself what the [ __ ] is wrong with you  nope mathematically  is there any country anywhere in the  world with zero pedophilia absolutely  zero  maybe a small island where the total  population is only 100 people you know  there might be some really tiny  societies where you're dealing with only  a few only so many people are living  there so you actually get down to zero  any society i would say any society with  more than 10 million people in the  population to some extent  to some extent  pedophilia is a problem right and you  have a society that that actively  educates people  and actively oppresses people  to try to eliminate pedophilia to try to  get it as close to zero  as possible  where do you think  there's more pedophilia today  thailand  japan  or  canada and why why do you think that is  within europe  catholic spain  catholic italy  say an eastern european country like  ukraine where where do you think it's  more or less wrong do you think there's  no social science research on this  do you think there are no discs on these  guys or do you think you've actually  been avoiding reading about this or  thinking about this have you ever seen a  single politician stand up and debate  this kind of stuff have you ever seen a  politician talk about what are the most  effective methods of eradicating  pedophilia  which countries in the world  have the best laws in place the best  role for  federal authorities local authorities so  the fact that it's impossible  doesn't mean  it's politically irrelevant  everything we aspire to accomplish in  politics is impossible  there is no country in the world with  100  literacy but we have a government policy  saying everyone has to be literate you  can tell me  the wording of this varies from country  country many countries around the world  have a policy saying it's our policy  everyone should be literate and if  you're illiterate we help you this way  if you're in prison and you're  illiterate still we're going to help you  we're really going to try to make 100 of  people capable of reading and writing  what are you going to say that there's  no point because you're going to fail  i think there's a difference between  living in a country where  99 of people are literate versus 95  versus 90 versus 85  [ __ ] you  like one of these things what kind of  cowardice is there at the basis of that  okay  all right  you say  it's impossible to abolish religion  do i look like a ghost to you  like  what is so impossible  about my life  it's like when people say it's  impossible to live on a vegan diet  you know  i am living proof that you can be vegan  i'm not kidding i talked to someone just  a couple weeks ago this has happened  only a few times in my life  and he really sincerely said to me that  he thought it was impossible to be sober  like i don't know if you've had the  there are people who even if it's just  marijuana and alcohol people who use  marijuana like i.e what we consider soft  drugs  i've met people who really seriously  said that like no it's not possible to  exist as an adult without getting drunk  at least a couple times a month or a  couple times a year or whatever their  their standard of normalcy was that  that's impossible no  like in a sense what i'm rejecting is  the notion that i'm either superhuman or  subhuman  no  you know  and if you're gonna argue that life is  too hard you think my life has been too  easy  keep watching the youtube videos you  think i haven't had heartbreak and  suffering and sorrow  i as opposed it's just ludicrous  okay look i understand what you're  saying here i know you're writing with  no bad intentions sorry  [Laughter]  sorry if this seems like a somewhat  over-the-top response here um  [Music]  you know i'll bring this comment back to  the other aspect of what um  uh matt dillahunty argued for and what  he argued against so with no explanation  as to the segway between these two these  two points of comparison he says we need  to abolish  religious privilege  easy example of religious privilege  these tax rights tax breaks tax  incentives  and then with no clear segue again and  again throughout the video  he talks about the impossibility of  being elected  in the united states of america  as an atheist  now to actually win an election  does not pardon me  it doesn't require that 51 of people  vote for you like you know you guys know  this in most western countries you could  win an election with sometimes 25  but nobody else got 26 so you win anyway  you can win  various ways and very it varies from  country to country  what the electoral system is  but let's just say for the sake of this  video that to win an election you need  30 percent of people to vote for you  just to use a round number and i'm just  telling you it's not true in some cases  in some cases you may need 51 but in  some cases you may need much less than  that you might be able to win with  20 of the votes  but to be a contender to have a let's  just say to be in the running and have a  serious shot of winning let's say you  want to have 30 percent of people  willing to vote for you  if you define the purpose and objective  of the atheist movement as merely being  the removal of religious privilege  so that we can all be equal so that we  can pretend we're all equally ignorant  so we can pretend that a legend about  the earth being flat is equally as valid  as you know basically a scientifically  factual description of the earth being  like a ball  right being a planet put it that way you  know so we could all just pretend  that you know creationism is equal to  evolution so we can all just pretend  that there's nothing wrong  with children being brainwashed in  madrasas that there's nothing wrong with  children being circumcised male or  female  so we can all pretend there's just  nothing wrong and guys like the  difference between judaism christian and  islam isn't worth talking about here or  mormonism or any of these other  religions i'm not not nearly focused on  islam here you think it doesn't harm  people to be educated from the day  they're born in the catholic faith i  think it does tremendous harm  you know a tremendous unspeakable  frankly irreversible harm  all right you want to pretend that our  only objective is to remove the  privilege  so that then we can all exist as equals  and then  you want to somehow suggest  that when we achieve this equality  atheists and religious people will be  able to compete as equals in  elections  that is impossible to imagine even  within the united states of america  within florida within georgia within  texas i mean i go across the map here  right that's  does that make a lot of sense to you in  iran  you know they have elections in iran  they do they have multi-party elections  and they have newspapers that write it  but a lot of people don't realize that  iran is not a dictatorship they actually  have multi-party democracy they actually  have elections you'd be surprised how  much freedom of speech they have okay  they also have  a fanatically  religious population the voters  are  religious the vast majority of them  so guess who wins the elections  again and again and again  and guess how carefully you have to  couch your words if you want to advocate  for any slight reduction in the powers  of  the islamic faith in that country if you  want to argue for a more secular future  and you know when are you going to have  30 percent of the people in iran  supporting an openly atheist  you know  contender in an election okay  you ever heard of this place israel  small country you know but but it's in  the newspapers a lot  for some reason  okay how what's what do you think life's  like for atheists in in israel  if you're ethnically jewish  but you're an atheist and what do you  think it's like running in elections as  someone who's openly  atheist in israel what do you think it's  like if you're born and raised in israel  and you're willing to stand up and say  circumcision should be abolished it's  barbaric  all right  i tell you this but the jewish religion  it's pro-alcohol islam is anti-alcohol  there's another example of  religion being arbitrarily right about  something by the way  you know you know what what if you're  you're jewish and you say look you know  alcohol causes brain damage we gotta all  stop drinking alcohol judaism is a  religion based on  ritual meat offerings the communal  sacrifice of animals and the eating of  meat you're saying hey that's bad and  evil and wrong maybe you're vegetarian  maybe you're vegan there are big  fundamental changes you want to pursue  in society and you're facing off against  the bigotry of  the vast majority of people who are  religious you know it's just  look  the problem with matt dillahunty's  approach  is that he's presenting you  with good intentions and appealing  slogans  and i'm saying to you these good  intentions and appealing slogans they  will lead only to the total ruination  of the atheist movement all right the  the deep seated libertarianism of this  model has to be rejected root and branch  and be honest i think that has to be  rejected by conservatives i think it has  to be rejected by liberals like left  right center i think that's something  left over  from the bad old days of ronald reagan  and  frankly i mean sorry but but but in  england it was really uh the labor party  i mean sickeningly it's you know the  battle days of tony blair tony blair  brought together the labour party with  uh neoliberalism and neoconservatism  however you want to put it these kind of  deep-seated libertarian assumptions i  think that's an incredibly influential  but now outmoded model of how we  conceptualize political reality that we  have to get rid of  and um  we have to deal with really tough  questions  of right and wrong  okay  meditation  doesn't work  you know  it really is inconvenient isn't it to  have to vilify meditation and yoga  as opposed to  um homophobia amongst southern  redneck preachers but from an atheist  perspective and i would argue from a  nihilist perspective what's most  important of all is to emphasize the  sense in which they are the same thing  it's the same error it's the same evil  which is belief  all right now faith healing  collecting donations from someone and  promising that you're gonna cure their  cancer heal what's wrong with them  whether it is through prayer whether  it's through a christian ceremony a  muslim ceremony a buddhist ceremony a  hindu ceremony it's bad and evil and  wrong in all instances  and why  belief  quite apart from the particular things  being believed in  like you can hold up a book  right  it's not because of the particular  contents of the book that i'm telling  you it's wrong to believe in it i'm  telling you it's wrong to believe in any  book  and i am aware of the advantages the  buddhists book pardon me the buddhist  book has over the christian book we'll  use it in the singular it's a huge  library in buddhism it's not just one  book it's one cd-rom though  i want to ask but you know  i'm aware of the advantages buddhist  scripture has over christian scripture  and i'm aware of the advantages  christian scripture has over muslim  scripture  they're not the same what's the same  is belief  all right  the evil  of putting children into a school  where they will be taught to close their  eyes and pray  and believe in this okay it's the same  evil  regardless of which one of these  religions we are examining  all right and it's the same solution  for all of them  we have to close down  those religious schools what we need are  coercive  atheist governments that really force  people in schools  to face up to the reality that the world  is round and not flat  that face a phase of the reality of  evolution  the theory of evolution which is  disturbing in its implications it is  it's upsetting it's morally disturbing  and not just when you're 11 years old or  something okay like i mean it doesn't  come up every day but you know yeah you  know what it's kind of tragic it's kind  of horrible to know that to some extent  we're all prisoners of these ingrained  instincts that were produced by millions  of years of evolution it's kind of  disappointing to find out that you  aren't an angel that fell from the sky  to the earth with supernatural abilities  nope you're just another monkey you know  like yeah i this is not this is not  something you're only going to be  disappointed with once or only be  disturbed about once right  but this is something children have to  start learning about i don't know at age  four or something at a very early age  you learn about evolution you learn  about its implications not once not  twice not ten times a hundred times in  your life you're really going to reflect  on the theory of evolution and its  implications for us you know  some of the implications for evolution  have to do with ecology too like looking  ahead to the future okay given that this  is what we what produced us this is  where we come from uh in an abstract  sense what do we got to do for the  future of of planet earth what's what's  the onus upon us what's the the  obligation upon us you know so on and so  forth you know this is not a simpler or  shallow thing for me personally i'm  fairly indifferent to the cosmological  elements i don't really feel that the  shape of the solar system or the size of  the galaxy it just doesn't mean that  much to me just being honest  you know if there were a new scientific  finding  that the milky way is actually so if  someone invents a better telescope and  it turns out the milky way shaped like a  triangle instead of this kind of swirl  shape  you know i'd kind of shrug my shoulders  you know well this goes to show those  those expensive telescopes man you know  i just don't care  a lot of people care i mean i've met and  spoken to  a lot of people for whom just  understanding the size and shape of the  universe was a big deal okay and look uh  kind of combining these two all right  homosexuality really matters it really  matters for straight people like i don't  think you just live your life as a  straight person ignoring this of course  it matters for for gay people too and  really accepting like look  human sexuality it doesn't make a lot of  sense  you know  there are all these guys who fetishize  women's high-heeled shoes like they're  all these really they're all these forms  human sexuality takes on and  homosexuality is one of the most common  you know it's this is a major element of  the human experience but there are also  all these other little strange you know  expressions that can't be rationalized  in terms of evolution well you know why  would a man want to have sex with a shoe  instead of a woman you know  this is this is the reality of life on  earth right and dealing with that  dealing with you know  um the irrationality and passion and  desire that we all have to deal with one  way or another how do you want to  prepare people to deal with that and  again i'm not i'm not saying it's easy i  mean it's really not as easy as just  embracing  homosexuals as your your brothers and  equals it's really a lifelong thing of  accepting the extent to which human  beings are alien from one another and  you know sorry you know this if you have  a lot of gay friends or if you're gay  yourself watching this it's not the case  that gay people have all this stuff in  common there can be two gay men who feel  completely alien from one another like  well they both identify as gay  but they're  different reasons why they're they're  really mutually alienated from one  another  i remember this um  the debates about gay marriage in  toronto  toronto had a huge gay community partly  because the gay people ran away from all  the small towns and moved to toronto  because they were less comfortable and  these more homophobic  smaller towns and cities  so we had we had a lot of gay people  and there were gay men who really  seriously argued that they were opposed  to gay marriage because  they they thought sex was better when  you just had a bunch of different  partners and never committed to one  person they were really passionately  arguing this was a medieval christian  concept of one man one woman and that it  was a tremendous error to replace it  with one man and one man like that that  know that if you're a gay man your whole  life you should just sleep around with a  bunch of different partners and not buy  into this now look i'm being with you i  don't think that's a shallow argument  but on the other side there were enough  gay people saying that no that's not  their sexuality that their experience of  homosexuality is monogamous and is about  commitment and that they want to be able  to adopt and raise children and they  want to have these benefits in terms of  life life insurance and health insurance  and  there are all these reasons all right  it's not some simple binary thing where  you flip a switch and go from a  homophobic society to a gay acceptance  society these are really really hard  things to deal with your whole your  whole life long and you know sorry in  case you haven't guessed i'm completely  pro  homosexuality and whatever i support gay  people politically but you know of  course as life goes on you can have  encounters that freak you out and  disturb  i  i've had gay men lay hands on me i've  had some situations that  test the limits of your time whoa  let's not get handsy buddy sure if it  happens you know you think you're  tolerant and then you move to thailand  look  let's all keep our hands dirty to  ourselves here guys  you know there are going to be things  that that freak you out and uh  you know anyway you're going to deal  with the extent to which people both gay  and straight they live with these these  terrible contradictory desires life is a  tragedy human sexuality is a tragedy for  the vast majority of people the vast  majority of the time the terrible  yearnings that can never be  never be satisfied gay or straight you  know the vast majority of people and  they they live with this contradiction i  live with this contradiction again  related to the fact  that we are only slightly raised up  above the apes okay  um when do you want people to start  dealing  with these contradictions and what  percentage of people  for me would have just described  even if we've only been dealing with the  shallow end of the swimming pool here  with these with these examples i mean we  can get into philosophy with a capital  letter p if you insist you know  um if you're going to have a working  democracy  can you have can you have a working  democracy where 99 people are  muslim fundamentalists  99 i should say  uh a real question can you have  a democracy in afghanistan  can you have a democracy in  saudi arabia can you  we've certainly tested the hypothesis  in recent years i think part of the  tragedy of communist china is that  everyone knows the chinese could have  democracy and they'd be great at it if  there's any country in the world that is  prepared for democracy it is communist  china and they are prepared by basically  two things atheism and literacy there  are people they read books  they read and talk about what's in the  newspapers they talk about politics  they're politically engaged and they're  predominantly  atheists and guys i know i know buddhism  i know confucianism i know taoism  even the people in china who participate  in those religions  trust me from  an american perspective they would count  as  atheists you can meet people in china  who describe themselves as a taoist to  describe themselves as a buddhist and  really they are an atheist who likes  buddhist literature  or they're an atheist who likes taoist  literature i mean the confusions are the  most extreme today i mean we're not  talking about traveling but today if you  meet someone from china who says they're  a confusion they are basically a modern  atheist person who appreciates confusion  literature and you know you could ask  them but don't you believe the earth is  flat  don't you reject  the theory of evolution and they will  look at you like you're completely  insane they say what what are you  talking about that's not what they mean  by buddhism right so of all the  countries in the world to be prepared  for democracy  the tragedy of communist china is that  we all know they could  they could have uh democracy you know  they're so close  right and yet you know because of the  dominion of the communist party they're  still they're still so far you know um  it's just  ridiculous  it's just ridiculous to say  that a free marketplace of ideas in  which every form of insanity  every form of religion and cult  is free  to lie  and cheat and steal  and manipulate people and engage in  hoaxes  and pious frauds and amass as much money  as they can and then set up schools to  brainwash children with that money what  the hell kind of model is that for the  future of the united states of america  what kind of model is that for the  future of france or england let alone  for the future of afghanistan iran or  what have you so guys that is the end of  my argument  it may seem like a subtle difference  or a subtle distinction  to differentiate a struggle against  religious privilege from a struggle  against religion  period  okay but i'm saying in making this error  and taking this false first step right  actually  matt dillahunty is setting atheism on a  disaster course  and again i'm sorry i've talked about  these things in such detail  because i don't think the arguments  about them are easy under any headache  you know  it just so happens  that atheists are right about a long  list of things that religious people are  wrong about in the united states of  america we're talking about christianity  is long heavy and it would be harder if  you think about a hypothetical world  where maybe religion is right about some  of those things and the atheists are  wrong  and we have a tremendous problem in  dealing with all the forms of  pseudoscience that atheists are wrong  about  so guys i will read your questions if  you have something intelligent to say  now's the time to say it  if you have nothing intelligent to say  by all means remain remain silent okay  who is going to stand up  and fight against  prescription antidepressant drugs  ssri medications we could also talk  about so-called antipsychotic  medications but for simplicity we can  just say prozac who is going to stand up  and say  this doesn't work this is pseudoscience  the negative side effects are really  significant and really terrible and the  benefits are either zero or so close to  zero that you're just looking at a  placebo effect etc who is going to stand  up and make that argument  do you want to be  a part of a society  in which the only way  you can reduce the number of people  ruining their life with psych meds with  prozac with similar  similar medications is to lead a mob  of religious fundamentalists  of religious fanatics  whom you manipulate  you lie to them you give the lectures  you convince them that these drugs are  the devil's work  yep this is yet to be attempted as far  as i know but whether it's in islam or  christianity things imagine a  charismatic figure like myself might go  around from time to time we might go  around from town to town and say back in  jesus's day people were depressed just  the same as they are now they didn't  take no pill for it they got drunk like  good honest trades  you know  you could say people should just drink  whiskey when they're depressed and  that's your you could build up  an army of religious fanatics  who are correct  like they're correct in their critique  of antidepressant drugs but they're  right for the wrong reasons  right  that's one view of the world if your  view of the world is just that it's  completely hopeless all we can ever have  is one group of religious fanatics  against another you could have a new  movement in the united states of america  arguing that you are a bad christian if  you take these psych meds and we all  have to stand up and get  go back to being drunk the way we were  in the dark ages or you know we have to  go back to this this earlier model of uh  psychiatric care shall i say you know  and who knows maybe throw in a bunch of  crap about prayer or whatever it is that  gets the crowd gets the crowd moving  okay well that's not my perspective  all right i think today in the united  states of america there's a tiny tiny  minority of people  who could be described as free thinkers  and then within that minority  there's a smaller minority who can be  called dissident intellectuals  and then within that smaller minority  there's an even smaller number of people  who are free thinking distant  intellectuals who are seriously trying  to make the world a better place who are  seriously trying to help the majority of  people  there are some people who are free  thinkers  and all they want to do is cocaine and  prostitutes they have no interest in  helping anyone else there are some  people who are free thinkers who become  distant intellectuals  but whatever they're all they're  interested in is their own artistic  self-indulgence  their own memoirs  all they want to write you know they  have no interest in helping themselves  they have no interest in changing the  world okay we're talking about a  minority within a minority within  minority  that tiny number of people  those are the only people in your  society  who  might  stand up  and challenge the paradigm the paradigm  of psychiatric care entertains the  notion  that  depression is a medically real illness  that you can treat with this pill and  then the further notion that this pill  is actually effective as a treatment  who will stand up and make that argument  who will do the right things for the  right reasons and who will ultimately  take that to congress take that to  parliament take that to the halls of  power and government and make it into a  coercive law  to eliminate this poison  from our society all right  this is my interest  my interest is in creating a society  where that tiny circle  gets larger and larger where the the  percentage of the population  that consists of free-thinking dissident  intellectuals  gets larger and larger and i think there  are all kinds of positive effects that  will come from that i think some just  saying not all three thing intellectuals  are going to care about politics  i think some of those people are just  going to spend their time trying to  invent a better can opener have you  opened a can of beans lately we're still  stuck in the dark ages on canvas they're  going to invent a laser that can open  can be you know some seriously i'm just  saying some people are free thinking  intellectuals but they're they're not  like me they don't they maybe they want  to change the world but not politically  not philosophically not not  ethically like maybe not even ethically  there's nothing ethical there there's  some kind of free thinking  disintellectual want to say you know  what  can openers it's got to be a better way  to open the canopy okay so my point is  when you increase the number of these  people i think it has positive knockout  effects throughout society including  parts society i'm just not that  concerned about i'm not really that  engaged in  the tech sector however you want to put  it you know it's not really what i'm  what i'm looking out for but that's  great if a new can opener comes out  great i'm all  i'm all for it okay if you think about  these concentric circles  free thinkers  distant intellectuals distant  intellectuals working in the public  interest for the good of the majority to  change the world pursuit of  positive political change okay  how big are those circles how big are  those minorities today  in iran  how big are they  in afghanistan  how big are they in saudi arabia  one of the simplest things that i ever  heard said by the the prime minister of  taiwan  you know  well this is during one of the periods  when i was there  prime minister of taiwan at the time  he said simply about communist china  he said you know they don't understand  you have to value dissent as something  precious that contributes positively to  our society  you know it's a beautiful it's really a  very deep cutting statement about  communist china again in this case  neither country is  religious you know taiwan is basically a  secular democracy communist china is a  secular democracy saying you know what  the difference is between  those guys and us they don't understand  these people the dissidents  as i'm calling them the distant  intellectuals dissent itself  is like a social service it's something  precious it's something positive  you have to value  i'll tell you something all the  religions have in common  even buddhism  even hinduism even animism like the  various forms of animism i have known  right  all of them snuff out dissent  all of them create  an authoritarian social structure  a hierarchy based on belief based on  blind faith that's what they have in  common  as religions  again  matt dillahunty i don't think you ever  studied buddhism i don't think you ever  studied hinduism i don't think you're  terribly well informed about  christianity to be honest i just don't  think you have a lot of book reading  a lot of book learning you know behind  you uh to me you still seem like a  pretty ignorant  the podunk ignorant person if you don't  mind my saying  but  if you take the time to do some research  and really contrast these other examples  and understand what they have in common  although everything else is different  you know like despite the profound and  serious differences what it is the  different religions have in common right  now bring this back to this question  what's my strategy  what is my strategy for eliminating  antidepressants ssri drugs in the united  states america i think the only shot  you've got  is to foster  a culture  of free thinking intellectual dissidence  is to really increase the number of  those people and by the way i don't  think they have to be rich i don't i  think they can live in poverty and still  change the world okay  tell me something  if you  are a free thinking  intellectual dissident  where can you go to university  in the united states of america can you  go to a mormon university  can you go to a catholic university  can you go to a protestant university  can you go to a left-wing communist  university  all right we have a society where even  at the university level it's incredibly  hard  to be a free-thinking intellectual  dissident and i would know and i am not  stupid enough to think the grass is  greener on the other side i've talked  i've known so many people at so many  universities throughout the western  world i've had so many professors  who were my friends  all right like let's just say you're a  guy who's a scholar of buddhism and you  want to talk about slavery within  buddhism  all right  the level of repression the extent to  which you will be kicked out of the room  the whole system is against you this is  the 24th talk about your 2000 the  president i'm not talking about ancient  history here i mean today that you can't  talk about slavery you know this kind of  thing you can't talk about hell like you  know really obvious topics in buddhist  buddhist studies  there's this there's an active world  anyway i can i could talk about a whole  bunch of different uh disciplines i've  been a part of that you know different  university departments have where i've  worked in it known the professors you  know so on and so forth what if you're  what if you're a free thinking  intellectual when you want to be in  first nation studies american  go through a lot of examples here but  whatever even politics even political  science you know  um  you know okay and the university level  this is where there's the most tolerance  of intellectual dissonance even though  i'm telling you and i'm telling you  passionately even though i can't take an  hour to illustrate those with examples  there is very very little margin for  tolerance for free thinking uh distant  intellectuals in our universities and so  little  i i do wonder if i'd gone to a kind of  pious christian university maybe they  would have been nicer to me maybe they  would have had the attitude of oh you  poor deer you're going to hell after you  die let's see if we can't help you it  might have just been nicer to me even  though they kind of dehumanize me  because let me tell you something going  to a nominally secular left-wing  university it was hell was terrible  communist professors can be much meaner  to you than christian professors i'm  sure some christian professors are also  mean and cruel people don't get me wrong  but i just say like it's so bad in our  current the level of conformism  oppression and so on in our so-called  secular universities that i question  maybe i would have done better  at a religious university it can be that  bad but that's university  to what extent are free thinking  intellectual dissidents and again  whether you think of those people going  to the sciences people going to  engineering not everyone's going to go  into politics not everyone's going to go  into philosophy not everyone's gonna go  into charity work not everyone's gonna  go to cambodia and try to do  you know humanitarian work to help poor  people in a post-war country not  everyone's gonna study a bunch of  languages people are gonna have  different interesting  what is the experience  of a free-thinking dissident  intellectual in high school  in the united states of america all  right what is it in high school in  england  in france in germany all right which of  these countries any of them just even  looking at the western markets which of  them foster and encourage and develop  free thinking intellectual dissidence  all right america has a horrible culture  this way at the high school level  unbelievable pretty much every single  one of these guys will tell you they  were suicidal during high school and  they'll tell you exactly why  they'll tell you exactly what their  experience was in high school and how  terrible it was to be an aspiring  intellectual growing up in an american  high school it's awful and again it's so  bad  like really is it or would you have been  worse at a catholic high school you know  again i'm not saying this to glorify the  guy but if you look at what life is like  in a catholic high school versus the  government nominally secular high  schools  on a case-by-case basis some of the  religious schools you might have been  better off there than in the government  system because that high school was so  bad  okay so again you can cast the net wider  you can think about iran you can think  about afghanistan think about these more  repressive cultures and you can think  about kindergarten and primary school  you can think about it from the womb  forward okay  there's a whole lot of progress  that is impossible  because we do not  have enough  free thinking intellectual dissidents  engaged in  real innovation  in asking  really hard questions in challenging the  status quo  in challenging the complacency  of our society right asking the  questions that make everyone  uncomfortable right  and it's only when you foster that it's  only when you expand that  that something like the convenient lie  that if you're unhappy there's a pill  that can make it better the convenient  lies that are beneath the pharmaceutical  industry marketing prozac to millions of  people right  who is going to challenge that right  it's not going to be one person all  right look at socrates they killed  socrates too in case you didn't know  i've made a video about it it's not like  there's one socrates who can stand up  and say this is all a scam that's  already happened if you didn't know  they've already been quite a few  different scientists who did the  research and wrote books and so on and  so forth and who stood up and said it's  all a scam that's not enough  you need a dynamic  you need myriad communities myriad  salons of dissonant intellectuals and  then the world can start to change and  guess what guys as as tough a critic as  i am of the american revolution i can  sit here and talk to you for hours about  everything that went wrong with the  american revolution who made it happen  it was a bunch of really eccentric  distant intellectuals these were really  weird guys sorry benjamin franklin was a  really really weird guy this is a  terrible book don't read this book but  anyway thomas jefferson was a really  really strange guy within their own  society at that time not just judging  them now these were extremely eccentric  distant intellectuals  who got together and  started asking tough questions started  coming up with an idea for a better  society and guys again we can all sit  here and criticize the american  revolution can you name a revolution  that was more successful this is  probably the most successful revolution  in the in the history of the world it  was certainly more successful in the  french revolution than the russian  revolution the chinese i mean  despite everything wrong with it right  so yeah there are certain kinds of  change that will await  having enough  people  in that  minority that can that can dynamically  instigate change  and um  [Music]  one of the reasons  why matt delhuny's approach to this is  wrong is that he's not acknowledging the  extent to which the perpetuation of  religion  isn't just a service like a pizza  delivery restaurant  that satisfies a need that exists today  or a desire that exists today  i'll come back to this pizza restaurant  pizza delivery company example just that  you know we're in a situation where  the existence of these religions the  existence of these institutions and  these religious schools it's snuffing  out  the possibility of progress in the  future there are children who go into  catholic schools and they have their  intellectual potential beaten out of  them  all right they are traumatized for life  there are children going to muslim  addresses there are children going into  hindutva schools like hindu religious  schools  i shouldn't have even said hundove i  should have said hindu schools doesn't  matter regardless hindu is a politicized  term but anyway um you know there are  children going into into buddhist  schools all right and i i am not even  making the claim that all these children  are brainwashed i'm telling you that  they are being taught to believe  and in learning  to believe  they're learning to dream  while they're wide awake all right  they're learning to live in a world of  prayers and riddles and sacred mysteries  and ancient excuses  for stupidity all right it is snuffing  out their intellectual potential and if  you guys have have difficulty  visualizing this  it's so much easier to visualize with  women than men  all right so look i i know probably just  challenge your own bias here i i used  the word intellectual dissident like 30  times  every single time were you imagining a  woman or a man  did you think of both women and men or  did you imagine like a man in a suit and  tie when i say intellectual dissident  okay women have just as much potential  to be intellectual dissidents  but it's even more obvious the way in  which all of their intellectual  potential is snuffed out by religious  education now again even with supposedly  moderate  christian schools what are they taught  they're taught to get married and have  babies immediately and i've i've met and  known women like that they're you know  some of them are taught to drop out of  school after a certain number of years  so they can get married and have babies  immediately and again you can look at  christianity you can look at islam a  woman who's taught to wear a headscarf  and get married and follow her husband's  commands and so on all right now you  know again i'm not some wild optimist  about human nature but whether you like  it's not that everyone is a genius and  then religion makes them into an  imbecile right but i am seeing to you  some percentage of these people some  percentage of women who are born  christian who are born jewish who are  born muslim or from buddhists who are  born hindu who are just born into one of  the miscellaneous animist religions in  japan they could have developed  intellectually and instead  religion suffocated their potential and  tried to turn them into an obedient  robotic housewife and it's just very  easy to see that if you meet these  people and talk to them face to face you  can say whoa you are a woman who has  been effectively brainwashed and  oppressed  by your religion you were you're a woman  who had your intellectual potential  snuffed out and you know what it might  be harder to see that in a man like  let's just say a man who went to all  mormon school he was born went to mormon  primary school high school mormon  university and let's say he became an  insurance salesman so he wears a nice  suit  he goes and does this work as an  insurance settlement he's not he's not  oppressed in the kind of obvious way  that a woman in afghanistan is oppressed  you know wearing this blanket you know  it's not oppressed in the same office as  a woman a  traditional muslim woman wearing a head  scarf or an orthodox jewish woman  wearing this elaborate costume so and so  on you know i know it may not be obvious  but if you get to know that guy  you know what you may realize is  this guy also had his intellectual  potential snuffed out of him he was sold  this pack of lies from the day he was  born and he was funneled and shaped into  this role to be again the same way we  could say the woman was made into this  kind of baby making robot she was made  into this white picket fence housewife  robot right okay  it may not be as obvious but there were  a lot of guys wearing suits and ties and  their lives have been destroyed by  religion too right their intellectual  potential has been uh has been snuffed  out  all right i'll take a moment now to read  your read your comments melissa is also  in the audience if she wants to comment  she could join it i admit this is one of  these unanswerable steamroller videos  i'm not expecting to get any emails  disagreeing with me  um  welcome if you support me on patreon  you're welcome to send me uh  you know welcome to send me a message uh  but you know i understand that this it's  very hard to answer and probably a lot  of what i'm saying are things that uh  you have to kind of live with for a  while and reflect on  for a while but you know  i am asking this question  you know  not out of  an egalitarian libertarian delusion such  as matt dillahunty preaches you know  we have to be willing to acknowledge  that religion is bad and evil and wrong  and that we are trying to eradicate it  that we are not just trying to eradicate  particular misconceptions within  christianity we're not trying to reform  christianity you know we're not trying  to create a world  where everyone is muslim but where we've  managed to convince them not to  implement sharia law like a reformed  islam that that you know rejects sharia  law but maintains this is not the  objective of of atheism the objective is  not to have a pluralistic society in  which some people are muslim some people  are christian and some people are  buddhists and we all get to be wrong  together some people are right and some  people are wrong  and that's part of why it's so  so important to recognize that communism  was wrong like it's relevant to this  discussion because you can have an  atheist dictatorship you can't have an  atheist political movement and an  atheist government authority that's also  bad and evil and wrong you know and that  atheists in a very real sense  believe it okay but you know the he  the solution to the puzzle  ultimately  has to be fostering  the culture of  intellectual dissent of i don't even  foster the culture in a in a palpable  sense increasing the numbers of  intellectual dissidents and when you've  got that you're going to get people who  are dynamic and brilliant and hard  working who are not satisfied with  mediocrity  that's going to transform all kinds of  things in our society some of those  people are going to say hey look you  know what  the way we teach math is terrible we've  got to improve math education again  that's not my mission in life but  someone is really in intellectual  distances look you're wasting children's  time they all find it boring and at the  end of the process they're not really  competent doing math let's really  improve math education i've heard many  many times that japan has a much better  quality of both math and science  education we could we could probably  improve math education the united states  and if we just imitated what japan was  already doing you can look at those  kinds of you know best case scenarios  i've also heard that about the education  system in hong kong hong kong i didn't  look into it as much i did look into it  a bit in japan you know i'm giving this  as an example where is that impulse  going to come from just that  this is again not thought of as as  religious whatever it's gonna come from  someone who who's you know uh a  reasonably brilliant intellectual  dissident who's not satisfied with the  compromises of the last 20 years is not  satisfied with the compromise of the  last 200 years who's willing to stand up  and say  let's try to overcome our collective  mediocrity people let's let's try to do  better all right and  in the doldrums of our of our  lazy self-indulgent culture nobody's  willing to stand up and do that in  challenging  prozac  nobody's willing to do that stand up and  do that in challenging marijuana now the  increasing popularity of everyone  inhaling this sedative to solve their  problems becoming a sedative addict you  know so on and so forth no one's willing  to stand behind this so is it any  surprise that nobody is going to stand  up to take on the church  you know whichever church it is you  think of  nobody is going to stand up and say  you know the future of paris would be  better if we burned all the cathedrals  down  like guys the future of paris france  cannot be  memorializing and worshiping church  architecture forever and ever this can't  500 years from now we can't still be  doing this [ __ ] something has to change  we have to really have a profound where  where's that impulse going to come from  all right i'm not claiming it's ever  going to come from the majority you know  to really be dissatisfied with the  mediocrity times a little bit and i've  said this in other contexts but you said  very briefly you know to be dissatisfied  with christmas is one thing so i don't  want to go on telling the same story  again and again whether it's a story  about jesus or a story about santa claus  or a story about rudolph the red-nosed  reindeer all of it it's at minimum you  have to say it's mediocre at maximum  it's actually evil right i want to  overcome this and have something really  brilliant and meaningful in my life but  those dissident intellectuals they will  also be dissatisfied with mickey mouse  they will also be dissatisfied with  batman and spider-man they'll try to  innovate and do something better on  those in those fields also so the  dynamism of of how much your your  society can change  and um how much those uncover to what  extent those  uncomfortable questions can be asked and  people can start coming up with with new  and better answers for them right that  comes from  comes from someone  somewhere all right and as long as you  have matt dillahunty's attitude sorry  sorry i promised you i'd come back to  the pizza delivery restaurant  matt dillahunty's attitude is equivalent  to saying hey  nobody needs to define  what is good pizza and what is bad pizza  uh this pizza company they do sicilian  style pizza this pizza company does  chicago style pizza this pizza company  does vegan pizza  and these other guys  they just make the cheapest pizza  possible  and through the cacophony of the free  market this great libertarian fantasy  just through let freedom of choice just  leave it up to individuals to choose to  order any pizza they desire to satisfy  their their needs and indulge their  feelings tonight and it'll take care of  itself in the end the voice of the  people will decide what is the best  pizza you know and there will be a  harmonious balance  of competing alternatives okay  that is just utterly untrue  of religion all right religion is not  like pizza delivery there are people  called sunni muslims and their position  is that they're right you're wrong and  when you die you go to hell  and there's nobody they hate more than  rival creeds within islam and they're  constantly at war with constantly save  struggle and strife with just the  difference between sunni and shiite okay  let alone the difference between  islam and judaism  etc etc okay pluralism it's  fundamentally irrelevant  to problems of religion and again okay  look the fact that you order a cheese  pizza today  doesn't prevent you from becoming a  vegan tomorrow all right there's some  reckless optimism for you like the fact  that you order chicago pizza today  doesn't mean that you can't change your  mind tomorrow and try sicilian pizza and  realize that you've been wrong for all  these years you try sicilian pizza once  you realize chicago pizza is terrible  compared to this other kind of pizza  you've had and it doesn't prevent you  from realizing you know  you should give up on cheese entirely  and start eating a vegan diet okay  inculcating religion  especially into children  but also middle-aged adults like fully  grown adults who just have a period of  weakness in their life like there are  people who are sad and broken-hearted  and they convert to islam as fully grown  adults middle-aged people  and they convert into when they join  extremist cult groups also because  they're sad and broken as fully grown  adults but whether it's children or  fully grown adults who undergo religious  conversion okay they can't just try  another brand of pizza next week this is  most obviously true with islam where the  punishment for changing your religion  once you have converted into islam is  death  islam is a religion by definition  believes in the death penalty for  rejecting islam and converting to  another religion it's not like  ordering a pizza  all right and whether you're talking  about muslim madrasas muslim schools in  israel in palestine you know for the  for the muslim anyway sorry just the  geography and what terms to use are  confusing talking about muslim addresses  in the middle east let's say you know or  you're talking about muslim addresses  within london england within the united  states within australia okay it's just  not the case that you can embrace this  or glorify it as freedom of choice and  if as if this fits into this this free  market  paradigm of embracing pluralism  and and as if the final objective of  atheism is just to say hey i'm happy  being atheist if you're happy  celebrating christmas or you're happy  circumcising your children then good for  you you do you like you you get to eat  your preferred flavor of ice cream you  get to have your preferred brand pizza  and i get to have mine then we all get  to live in this society together and  it's funny because mattel honey himself  in this one video he draws attention to  the ultimate absurdity of this which is  the question of political power  okay so you want to kid yourself this  way and pretend that the difference  between islam and atheism is just like  ordering a pizza  okay what happens when election time  comes around because it as to say it  doesn't even have to be 51 percent of  the population to dominate electoral  outcomes you could have a voting bloc of  just 30 that that decides every  electoral outcome because those 30 30  vote in one block and they decide all  the elections where you live forever  more okay guess what it's like living in  a place where just 51 percent of people  are muslim and voters are blocked guess  who's elected and guess who isn't and  guess what starts to happen in terms of  your changing political conditions  including most obviously education for  for children so it's like  how optimistic are you about the future  of turkey  turkey is the ultimate example  of completely phony completely hollow  pluralistic secularism because that is  government policy in turkey turkey is  nominally a secular country but in  practice in reality it's uh dominated by  islam